the Bruins and Canadiens have created a
rivalry that seems some it's full
of tradition and blood and Stanley Cups
but rivalry and beef are two different
things
one can help propel the other sure but
beef requires a special group of players
seen way too much of each other to turn
something storied into wealth whatever
this was stylistically these teams were
a powder keg
the big bad Bruins could change games
with their physical play they owned a
size advantage over most teams best
exemplified by their captain Zdeno Chara
who was more than ready to stick up for
a teammate but guys like Milan Lucic
rarely needed the help and the smaller
Brad Marchand could also hold his own or
just serve as a lightning rod to get
things going the Canadians were smaller
speedier and had a cast of fresh faces
seemingly prescribed for this rivalry
pique Subban emerged as a star
defenseman with solid scoring ability
but an even better ability to poke the
bear guys like Max Pacioretty and
eventually alexei emmalin made it clear
this was a team that still could get
physical this crew headlined a new wave
of players that were ready to fire up
some beef heading into 2010-2011 there
wasn't much reason to guess what was in
store sure there were a couple mini
feuds that tried to get off the ground
they met in the playoffs with more
regularity but things were fairly calm
inter Subban and Marchand in their
second time facing off that season as
the Bruins sliced his way up the ice
pique caught him with a massive hit that
sent Marchand to the bench it also sent
some Bruins after Subban who not only
shrugged them off but set the Habs up
with a man advantage and that order of
operations it pissed off Boston he hit a
Bruin he declined fights he drew a
penalty he established what would become
a theme David Krejci voiced Boston's
disapproval of how Montreal being a
smaller team could get away with some
stuff that a bigger more physical team
like
couldn't which led to the Bruins taking
things into their own hands the Habs
pretty much SID yeah you got it in one
they knew it was an emotional matchup so
why not play right into that and pique
didn't mince words when describing the
team's mentality against Boston this new
batch of Canadians was already drawing
the ire of Boston faithful what
amplified things was that for the first
half of the season Montreal had the
Bruins number as the teams were
neck-and-neck in the standings even when
they squared off for a third time and
the Bruins had a 200 lead with under
three to play the Habs found a way to
pull off the comeback in overtime and
thanks to that extra time together after
Pacioretty scored his game-winner he
celebrated with a little shove to Chara
Chara disapproved looked to take on the
entire Habs line by himself but the refs
managed to squash things for now as
Boston's captain was escorted off the
ice
Montreal took over the top spot in the
division that meant the Habs were in
more of a joking mood when discussing
the event after the game with Pacioretty
adding that he couldn't even move the
6-9 defender as for Chara he had no
intentions of chatting considering how
the teams were built it was a little
surprising who was pushing who around
that was on the mind of Bruins head
coach Claude Julien ahead of their next
showdown Julien had a special
perspective on the rivalry having spent
a few years behind Montreal's bench and
look to send a message to his guys which
in turn was relayed to the Habs through
fists and goals february 9th 2011 became
something special with just two points
separating the teams they turned in an
absolutely wild performance emotions
overflowed at the end of the first
thanks to Carey Price shoving Lucic from
behind a few times
Lucic quickly countered and the Habs
defense specifically Subban responded in
turn everyone got involved with the
clock at zero and a couple of our key
beef boys got a little separation from
the pack but with three of the four
officials focused on them the tension
just kept on building but it finally got
some release during a second period that
felt like a full game all by itself
seven goals in just over six minutes it
was an explosion that no one could have
seen coming and left the broadcaster's
baffled and giddy but there was also the
more expected explosion and that got
sparked by this icing call Marshawn
shouldn't have finished this check but
since he did everyone jumped to the
corner including a pair with some fresh
history Chara tried his hardest to get
Pacioretty to square up but the hab
declined with a little turtling not to
be left out Tim Thomas skated all the
way over to ask price for a dance which
mostly ended in exhausted smiles their
comic relief capped off a scuffle that
would leave the penalty boxes well
beyond capacity then ones Boston
stretched their lead late the beef again
took full focus
Subban head sparred with Nathan Horton
all night long often getting the worse
into face
so when Subban came in with his stick
high and Horton offer - of gloves went
flying but Lou cheek also really wanted
Subban and caused a pileup in the corner
then hugged pk for himself thanks to the
reps we still wouldn't get Subban
throwing punches and this would just be
an amused bouche - the final dish with
nothing but beef to play for Andrew
France and Travis Moen got us started
behind the net as they went to the ice
the rest paired up and the Canadiens
took a few more l's on the night poor
Tom Pyatt a beautiful boy there was one
last gasp as Adam McQuaid possibly on
chars behalf tried to get Pat ready to
fight but the refs were ready to go home
and I can't blame them the game had
gotten so out of hand that people were
asking what place fighting still had in
the sport but for the Bruins that night
of absurd numbers who was worn as a
badge of honor
Marchand made it clear they had been
sick of getting beat by Montreal in both
senses of the word the fact they were
able to maintain the lead meant they
could retake the physical edge as well a
mission easier said
and done since they continued to try and
fight a team that didn't want to fight
he called out Subban specifically
claiming he declined for fights on one
shift with two more regular season
matchups and playoff potential it seemed
there would be plenty of chances for
that to change but their next time
facing off the beef took a different
look after going at it with varied
results over the last two games
Pacioretty and Chara caught up with less
than 20 seconds left in the second
period Chara finished a check arguably
late which guided Pacioretty head into
one of the barriers along the bench
resulting in one of the scarier sights
within the sport it left him unconscious
on the ice needing to be stretchered off
the hit understandably stole headlines
for Montreal's when it sent Pacioretty
to the hospital but once the league
reviewed things they decided not to
suspend Chara and there were a lot of
thoughts about this it was already a
brutal hit that could have been much
much worse
Pacioretty was left fuming while in
recovery he felt that Chara had some
intent behind the hit those who were on
the ice described the moment as sounding
like a gun went off at that point Chara
wasn't too apologetic said that it was
unfortunate and it was on his mind but
he also didn't believe he was fully to
blame here maybe the guy going at full
speed leaned and jumped into the
turnbuckle historically Chara had been a
pretty clean player which was the main
argument for why he wasn't suspended
most folks though through his past out
the window it was less about him and
more about the league not sending a
message to curb dangerous hits even
charas teammate patrice bergeron who had
unique insight on what Pacioretty was
going through wondered whether that type
of hit at its most innocent level should
be in the game had it been left up to
the fans Chara would have faced
something bigger than just a suspension
Montreal's police did in fact open an
investigation on the Bruin but while
that would take time to get sorted out
hockey had to be played and these teams
still had to see each other again talk
of retribution came to no surprise for
Chara
his coach though summed up the last few
months a storied rivalry that turned
uglier than you'd want which would
justify a revenge narrative it just
wouldn't need to be carried out by
Montreal and just in case the Habs
needed a little more reason to do so
Mark Recchi stoked the flames by
accusing the Canadians of blowing
Pacioretty xin jury out of proportion in
hopes of getting Chara suspended he
later claimed to just be trying to take
some of the heat off Chara
it's just there are less shitty ways you
could do that mark but with the
retribution in the air their next
matchup was a different type of beating
for Montreal and although the Habs won
the regular season series Boston had
completely stolen the momentum just in
time for these teams to meet in the
playoffs that opening round matchup
turned into an absolutely incredible
back-and-forth series with just some
minor moments for our sake like a middle
finger to the fans or the occasional
fight but the biggest beef changer was
that Boston got proper bragging rights
and not just for winning a grueling
seven-game series they went on to win
the whole dang thing it was just the
second time they'd ever gone through
Montreal on the way to winning the Cup
and while even in victory some Bruins
still found time to focus on the
flopping proficiency of certain players
as Boston hoisted the cup it solidified
a gap between these teams that was about
to grow wider Montreal tail spend the
following season and with two sides
going in different directions
things understandably calm down in a
relative sense there were still moments
like PK and Marchand dropping gloves but
that only made it clear why this was a
rare sight for Subban sure they still
hated each other it's just that would
always be the case in the storied
rivalry as Boston finished top of the
division Montreal was down at the bottom
and those places would remain stagnant
longer than normal things to a lockout
which shortened the 2012-13 season but
that shortened schedule might have been
just what they needed to reheat the beef
with four meetings in only two months
there was no way to avoid their feelings
each contest was a one score game the
Habs won three of the four and after
each of those Boston defeats the outcry
resurfaced over subin's or the Habs
less-than-honorable tactics but most
importantly the Bruins found a new pain
in the ass
alexei emmalin in his second year
embraced the feud like so many before
him in march he had a little body shot
on Tyler Seguin which led to a response
from Chara down behind the Montreal goal
that earned the bees captain a game
misconduct during yet another fight
filled night but char wasn't the only
one to set his sights on the half he and
Lou Cheech were a natural pair left wing
against right defenseman physical
players they were on a collision course
and as they got to know each other their
relationship fully bloomed in 2014 a
year where Montreal once again had
Boston's number that was possibly
because when it came to playing their
rivals we Cheech said Boston was letting
emotions get the better of them and not
playing their type of hockey but in
their final regular season meeting with
the Habs
no one including Lou teach himself put
weight to his words emotions flowed very
early in the first when emmalin upended
milan with a pretty great hip check
Chara disagreed and gave everyone a
chance to get together as the broadcast
pointed out Lucic was ready to start
some
the bench right now tell him the king's
bench you just woke up the Beast
but when Emaline repeatedly declined his
offers that Bruin opted for a little
grundle tap that sent the defenseman to
the ice which made his frustrations
clear afterwards calling emmalin a
chicken for not wanting to fight she
wasn't scared he would he would want to
you know he'd stand up and hit me and
not go after my knees so you know it
just shows how big of a chicken he is
that he needs to go down like that to
take me down so and he wasn't the only
one who continued to be frustrated by
montreal but good news for Brad plenty
more opportunities to do some hits that
same pair continued to serve as
spokesman for the rivalry but weren't
looking to offer any new bolts and board
material Marchand even threw some
compliments subin's way while pointing
out that Boston needed to take every
chance they got to hit him without
falling for the traps that he presented
for Montreal they knew what this bruins
team could do and while they offered
praise the Habs were also aware their
usual antics may not have the same
effect with more on the line but even
with relative niceties folks saw the
potential this series had and for better
or worse that potential was met the good
game one required double overtime thanks
to Boston's scoring three goals in the
third the bad one Subban ended it there
things got ugly in a new way the bruins
organization spoke out quickly
condemning the abuse directed at Subban
which was on such a scale that the slur
began trending on Twitter in Boston
Marchand and Lucic denounced the racist
messages standing up for a guy they'd
made it well-known they wanted to punish
in the past
Boston sportswriter Dan Shaughnessy
perfectly summed up the city's
relationship with Subban after Game
three he pointed out that if pique was
wearing a Bruins jersey doing the same
stuff he was doing for Montreal fans
would be pushing for a statue of him
outside the arena but for now it was the
one sour note to another amazing series
they once again needed seven games to
decide things but this time Montreal
finished on top with decisive wins in
the final two contests
and as the teams gathered to share
respect the Cheech adds some feelings to
share with the guys he'd gone against
maybe a couple times too many emmalin
and dale whites were on the receiving
end of some choice words which quickly
made their way to the media the berlin
was asked about the comments but it
wasn't interested in going into that
that was for babies he felt like a code
was broken not by him and wasn't going
to apologize for it Looch each defended
it by saying he played on emotion always
had so maybe he was prone to an
emotional outburst or to the Habs
obviously didn't expect him to genuinely
kill someone all could agree that would
definitely cross the line but they were
expecting a tough game the next time
they shared the ice and at the start of
the 2014 season they got it
although emmalin once again was required
to set him off a well-timed shoulder
sent the Bruin to a familiar place and
when Lucic expressed some of his
emotions against emmalin from behind he
was again booked which helped the
Canadiens grow their lead from the box
he directed a motion towards the
Montreal crowd like he was rolling dice
or something it's hard to tell but he'd
go on to salute the refs and say his
farewells to Montreal as he received a
game misconduct with 20 seconds
remaining
so if he'd planned a revenge tour it
hadn't gone too smoothly but if nothing
else he was consistent and true to
himself and how he played which is
really important to this beef one that
wins around in a bit of an unorthodox
way and means something different to
different people at different times for
Lucci his emotions had helped fuel not
just his performance but his
contributions to the rivalry tito Curtis
put it very well he wasn't just being a
bastard for the sake of being a bastard
his passion was needed by Boston he
loved what he did so at its most basic
level can't that effort be appreciated
even by the most die-hard Canadian fan
it's like Subban his jersey would sell
out in Boston if he was playing for the
B's but because he agitated them through
the Bruins off their game did whatever
he needed to do to help his team win
loathed in Boston that goes the same for
Marchand for Chara for emmalin and i
think that's exactly why this rivalry
has remained great in a traditional
sense while also capable of catching
fire at any second they have always been
together
they have always complemented each other
but for the most part there has also
been respect and it's been when that was
lost that things really changed that's
what led to repeated cheap shots or
regrettable comments or games filled
with brawl after brawl but because the
history of their rivalry predates any of
the players even anyone watching this
they'll continue to find an appreciation
for one another which helps level things
out it just might take a long time to
find that appreciation so this iteration
of beef is done it petered out as the
teams missed each other in the playoffs
and the schedule with less divisional
games meant fewer chances to keep it
fresh players went off to wear new
jerseys find new foes but surely this
won't be the last time Boston and
Montreal's historic rivalry jumps the
shark and lands in beefier waters all it
takes is the right collection of players
and a little overexposure hey thanks for
watching
if you want take a second to subscribe
and hit the bell for notifications then
check out my favorite beef the Red Wings
an avalanche or maybe this is more up
your alley
I don't know live your truth
[Music]
you